Adding Reading Pool State guide to docs (#793)
Uniswap/docs: docs/contracts/v4/guides/07-read-pool-state.mdx

title: Reading Pool State
---

## Introduction

> Unlike previous versions, v4 uses a different approach for storing and accessing pool data, which requires understanding the use of `StateLibrary` and `extsload`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike previous versions, v4 uses a different approach for storing and accessing pool data, which requires understanding the use of [`StateLibrary`](/contracts/v4/reference/core/libraries/StateLibrary) and [`extsload`](/contracts/v4/reference/core/Extsload).
```

To address this, Uniswap V4 introduces the StateLibrary and the concept of using `extsload` for reading pool state. These mechanisms provide efficient ways to access the data stored in this complex structure.

### The StateLibrary and `extsload`

```solidity
abstract contract Extsload is IExtsload {
    /// @inheritdoc IExtsload
    function extsload(bytes32 slot) external view returns (bytes32) {
        assembly ("memory-safe") {
            mstore(0, sload(slot))
            return(0, 0x20)
        }
    }

    // [...]
}
```

The `StateLibrary` is a crucial component in Uniswap v4 for reading pool state. It utilizes the `extsload` function, which is an external wrapper for the `SLOAD` opcode. This allows for efficient reading of arbitrary storage slots.

**How `extsload` works:**

- It takes a storage slot as input.
- It reads the value stored in that slot directly, using `SLOAD`, from the contract's storage.
- It returns the value as a `bytes32`.

This method is more gas-efficient than traditional getter functions, especially when reading multiple storage slots.

> Moreover, using `extsload` instead of hand-written Solidity view functions helps to keep the contract bytecode size down. This is particularly important for Uniswap v4, as the core contracts are already quite close to Ethereum's contract size limit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, using `extsload` instead of hand-written Solidity view functions lowers the contract bytecode size. This optimization is particularly important for Uniswap v4, as the core contracts are nearly at Ethereum's contract size limit.
```

### TransientStateLibrary and `exttload`

```solidity
abstract contract Extsload is IExtsload {
    /// @inheritdoc IExtsload
    function extsload(bytes32 slot) external view returns (bytes32) {
        assembly ("memory-safe") {
            mstore(0, sload(slot))
            return(0, 0x20)
        }
    }

    // [...]
}
```

> While `StateLibrary` deals with persistent storage, `TransientStateLibrary` is used for handling transient storage. Transient storage, introduced in EIP-1153, is a way to store data that is only needed for the duration of a transaction, making it ideal for temporary data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While `StateLibrary` deals with persistent storage, [`TransientStateLibrary`](/contracts/v4/reference/core/libraries/transient-state-library) is used for handling transient storage. Transient storage, introduced in EIP-1153, is a way to store data that is only needed for the duration of a transaction, making it ideal for temporary data.
```

> It uses the `exttload` function, which is similar to `extsload`, but for transient storage; it is an external wrapper for the `TLOAD` opcode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It uses the [`exttload`](/contracts/v4/reference/core/Exttload) function, which is similar to `extsload`, but for transient storage; it is an external wrapper for the `TLOAD` opcode.
```

## Implementing a `PoolStateReader` Contract

Let's create a `PoolStateReader` contract that showcases different methods for reading pool state. For each function, we'll explain its purpose, how it works, and provide an example use case.

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
pragma solidity 0.8.26;

import {IPoolManager} from "v4-core/interfaces/IPoolManager.sol";
import {PoolKey} from "v4-core/types/PoolKey.sol";
import {PoolId, PoolIdLibrary} from "v4-core/types/PoolId.sol";

contract PoolStateReader {
    using PoolIdLibrary for PoolKey;

    IPoolManager public immutable poolManager;

    constructor(IPoolManager _poolManager) {
        poolManager = _poolManager;
    }

    // Functions will be implemented here
}
```

Before we start, we need to import `StateLibrary` from the libraries available in v4-core.

> ```jsx

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```solidity
```

import {StateLibrary} from "v4-core/libraries/StateLibrary.sol";
```

Let's focus on this important line that we should add:

> ```jsx

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```solidity
```

**Use Case:**

This function is crucial for applications that need to manage or analyze individual liquidity positions:

- A liquidity management dashboard could use this to display a user's current positions and earned fees.
- An automated liquidity provision system could use this to decide when to rebalance or compound rewards.
- An analytics tool could use this to calculate the performance of different liquidity provision strategies.

### `getFeeGrowthGlobal`

```solidity
function getFeeGrowthGlobal(PoolKey calldata key) external view returns (
    uint256 feeGrowthGlobal0X128,
    uint256 feeGrowthGlobal1X128
) {
    return poolManager.getFeeGrowthGlobal(key.toId());
}
```

**Explanation:**

This function retrieves the global fee growth for both tokens in the pool. These values represent the cumulative fees per unit of liquidity since the pool's inception.

**Use Case:**

Global fee growth is essential for several advanced operations:

- Calculating the fees earned by a position that has been held for a long time.
- Analyzing the overall fee generation of a pool over its lifetime.

> - Comparing the performance of different pools or fee tiers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Comparing the performance of different pools or fee tiers.

---

For additional reference, see [`StateLibrary`](/contracts/v4/reference/core/libraries/StateLibrary) and [`Extsload`](/contracts/v4/reference/core/Extsload)
```
